feat: add third release blog post (#16)
ariel-os/ariel-os.org: content/blog/ariel-os-0-3-0.md

+++
date = '2026-01-27T15:28:40+01:00'
draft = false
title = "Ariel OS 0.3.0: Smart sensors"
# tags = ["Release"]
+++

> Today we are happy to announce a new version of Ariel OS. With over 6 months of work and 400 merged PRs, this new version brings shiny features and improvements. These include upgraded Embassy and esp-hal dependencies, UART support, a brand new way to write and access sensors, Bluetooth Low Energy support, structured board descriptions and much more!

Reviewer: Technically there's still two sentences on line 101 (grep for `\. `), but nbg.

On top of those new features, this release adds support to more MCUs and boards, some of those were added by the community!

You can check out the full changelog of [Ariel OS 0.3.0](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/releases/tag/v0.3.0).

Let's go over some of the highlights of this release.

## Upgraded Embassy and esp-hal

> This was the major blocker for this new release, making everything work with as little breakage as possible, most applications built for Aiel OS v0.2.0 should work with Ariel OS v0.3.0 with little to no modification. You can check the full list of breaking changes in [the changelog](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/releases/tag/v0.3.0).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This was the major blocker for this new release, making everything work with as little breakage as possible, most applications built for Ariel OS v0.2.0 should work with Ariel OS v0.3.0 with little to no modifications. You can check the full list of breaking changes in [the changelog](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/releases/tag/v0.3.0).
```

Currently the sensors have to be initialized manually in the application. The long term goal is to have the sensor initialization code automatically integrated into the app and the list of sensors to be initialized would be handled in the board descriptions.

Speaking of board descriptions...

## Structured board descriptions

Structured Board Description or SBD is a new format created to describe how components on a board are wired to the MCU. Currently supported components are LEDs, buttons and USB ports. This allows us to have some simple conditions to filter hardware: need an LED to display the status of your application? Select the "has_leds" module. Need some basic interaction? Select the "has_buttons" laze module.
The access to leds and buttons is also generated, you can access them using `ariel_os_boards::pins::LedPeripherals` and `ariel_os_boards::pins::ButtonPeripherals`, with a new macro `ariel_os::hal::group_peripherals!` for when your task needs peripherals from multiple peripheral structs.

> Our [blinky example](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/tree/main/examples/blinky) is now even simpler, the pins.rs file with manual pins declaration is not needed anymore!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our [blinky example](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/tree/main/examples/blinky) is now even simpler, the `pins.rs` file with manual pins declaration is not needed anymore!
```

    let mut led0 = Output::new(peripherals.led0, Level::Low);

    loop {
        led0.toggle();
        Timer::after_millis(500).await;
    }
}
```

## Bluetooth Low Energy

This release also adds supports for Bluetooth Low Energy, BLE. On [supported hardware](https://ariel-os.github.io/ariel-os/dev/docs/book/hardware-functionality-support.html) (check for the "Bluetooth Low Energy" column) the bluetooth hardware is automatically initialized when selecting a BLE-related laze module: `ble-peripheral` or `ble-central`, you can then obtain a [`trouble_host::Stack`](https://docs.embassy.dev/trouble-host/0.1.0/default/struct.Stack.html) using `ariel_os::ble::ble_stack().await;`, you can interact with this `Stack` to use the bluetooth functionality.

Here's a simple task that advertises a "peripheral", you can find more detailed examples in [`examples/ble-advertiser`](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/tree/main/examples/ble-advertiser) and [`examples/ble-scanner`](https://github.com/ariel-os/ariel-os/tree/main/examples/ble-scanner):

```rust
let mut host = ariel_os::ble::ble_stack().await.build();
let mut adv_data = [0; 31];

> let len = AdStructure::encode_slice(&[AdStructure::CompleteLocalName(b"Ariel OS BLE"), AdStructure::Flags(LE_GENERAL_DISCOVERABLE | BR_EDR_NOT_SUPPORTED),],&mut adv_data[..],).unwrap();

Reviewer: Can you make sure we don't have to scroll horizontally (too much) to read the snippet?
